Having the TV or a light on
when you’re trying to go to sleep
is more than just distracting.
Both can actually affect
what has been called “the hormone of darkness.”
This hormone, called melatonin,
is involved in your daily biological cycles,
including your sleep cycle
and patterns of sleeping and waking.
Melatonin is produced by a small,
pine-cone shaped gland
deep in middle of the brain
called the pineal gland.
When the pineal gland is producing a lot
of melatonin and blood levels of the
hormone are high, you feel sleepy
and your body temperature lowers to prepare for sleep.
The pineal gland keeps secreting melatonin
based on what your body perceives as
the length of night.
So blood levels of melatonin are
low during the daylight hours
and peak during the dark.
And this is based on the amount of light
hitting the retina of your eye.
Light on the retina sends a signal
to a part of the brain called the hypothalamus,
which coordinates the signals
of your biological clock.
When light is hitting the back of your eyes,
the hypothalamus signals the pineal
to stop releasing melatonin.
You wake up and your body temperature starts to rise.
A dark room helps you to sleep
because it increases melatonin production.